Okay, we're taping again.
This is the guy that's the union representative to SEIU.
He doesn't work for librarians, he does work for the library, but represents several different guilds, one of them being the librarians' guild.
And he stood up at one place and suggested, well, just, you know,
As you've got to cut things, reduce your book budget.
And my position was absolutely not.
Why do people come to a library?
Do they come to a library to see staff, or do they come to a library for books and materials?
What do you change the nature of the institution?
This is the argument we had in 1994, when the proposal of the mayor was basically to eliminate the book budget.
You change the nature of an institution if you're no longer buying materials.
Are you buying materials now?
I mean, I've heard suggestions that new acquisitions of books is almost moribund right now.
Is that...?
I don't think that's true.
No, no, that's something I'll ask.
Let me be really honest, too.
I think that some of the people you're talking to, I think, are some of the most deceitful group of people with their own political agenda.
I think the agenda of about five of the library staff, and you've probably talked to all five, or you will, has been maintaining their own political power, has been
I mean, even Dowlin, going to his teaching job he's got now, was hounded.
David Price, who was our financial guy, was hounded in his job as a state librarian in West Virginia.
Do you want to see how great these folks are?
Would you like to see?
This is up on billboards, you know, around, went up this weekend.
This is on me.
I want to post that.
I'm looking for the take at a wanted post to Stephen A. Coulter, SBC Communications.
What's that, SBC Communications?
It's the Holman Company.
I'm sorry, Bill.
So this is what you are.
You represent the public, not a greedy Texas telephone company.
You're a lawbreaker, a public library.
What do they mean by that?
They're alleging that you're a lawbreaker?
A legal conflict?
Coulter owns over 5,000 SBCs?
If it's true, why is it an issue?
I didn't put it up.
No one has come and talked to me about it.
Yeah, legal meetings.
Open meetings.
Are they alleging open meeting law violations?
How do you respond when you see something like this?
Because I just laughed.
I couldn't believe it.
I've gotten several calls today.
Why is there this kind of hostility?
Is this coming from this group of librarians?
a guy named Gillespie, who's in court suing us on stuff, and some of the people you're going to be talking to tomorrow you've already talked to.
It's the guild activists of which they're—some of the guild stewards, frankly, are fine and great people, but there's two or three that have a really sour attitude on life, and they don't want any changes, no matter what the changes are.
Wax eloquently about the glories of the old main library, you know, when it was a disaster.
And this kind of stuff.
I mean, I get attacked at commission meetings fairly regularly by guild people, and by half a dozen, not even half a dozen, three or four, that the gadflies, two or three of them more than most.
What do you mean gadflies?
These are people from the civilian side of speech.
Yeah, they're just self-appointed community people who come in, and there's about four of them.
Like Kerwin?
is one of those that's involved in a lawsuit that Jim Gillespie you will end up talking to.
Chafee.
Chafee's fame and glory is that he hasn't missed a commission meeting in 20 years.
He alleges that there was money left for acquisitions of books and that it was diverted to
to get computer stuff.
And I guess there wasn't one of the suits that you watched, I think, by the way.
You suit us on that.
The suit that's in court right now, in which that's where this tape issue comes up, is whether under the Sunshine Ordinance we came out of a closed-door session and announced that we had a leading candidate for secretary.
We would not announce it yet pending a background investigation by staff.
and further questions by a couple of us of some of his previous employers.
They sued over that and the appointment of Gina Menudry, but this is the one that's still there.
The judge ruled that Gina Menudry was moot, and it was the mayor's prerogative.
She sounds wonderful.
Oh, she's wonderful.
I can't wait to meet her.
She's a hoot.
Wasn't she considered for the Dowling job?
Wasn't she actually considered for this job once upon a time?
She told me that, yeah.
I wasn't here when Dalvin was.
This was before my watch.
Dalvin was hired in 87.
I came on at the end of the day.
But anyway, so they're in suit.
They try to get a restraining order against us for moving forward.
And it gets really vicious.
The tape of that particular meeting, we can't find.
But the legal issue is minuscule, basically, as to whether or not we had to
Their position is we have to violate the privacy of the individual candidate because we said we had a leading contender, therefore we had to go public with that, and then do the background search with the police search.
We talked to previous employers.
We told staff to do that.
The next meeting of the commission, we heard from the staff on the background.
We interviewed the guy once more.
We offered him a job.
We came out and we announced.
They're claiming that we are criminals because
of how we handled that.
This is Chafee's 15th lawsuit against us.
He won one.
The one that he won was three committee members were meeting.
There were seven members on the commission.
Three people were sitting holding a meeting on finance, and one of the commissioners came, another commissioner came and sat in the audience and wanted to hear the testimony.
They claimed that that was an illegal meeting of the Library Commission because you had a fourth member there, even if she didn't say it.
She just sat, listened, took some notes, got up a month.
They're claiming that that was a violation.
And the judge said, under the Sunshine Ordinance, technically that's true.
So going forward, if, for example, what came up not a month later was I wanted to testify on my own bill that I had up in front of the commissions.
And so we had to post a legal notice that said this is a meeting of the planning committee, you know, composed of these people.
If a fourth commissioner should attend, it will become a full meeting of the library commission and is duly noticed, which is absurd and it's very confusing.
I showed up at the meeting, presented to the committee, left.
They then went into courts.
accused me of blatantly disregarding the judge's orders and accused me of criminal conduct, and the judge threw it out.
Said what they did was perfectly reasonable.
They followed precisely what it was I suggested.
That's the level of combat.
I call it fairies on it, counting fairies on the head of the pin, kind of legalese.
I mean, if you think of in the...
In the Middle Ages.
There's angels on the head of a pin, yeah.
Yeah, angels on the head of a pin are fairies.
It is, it's nonsensical, the stuff we get into.
But you get this stuff, the judge actually lost his temper with them last week at one of their court events.
So what's motivating the gadflies?
The gadflies, oh, it's fame and glory.
I mean, it's trying to, it's a gotcha game.
I mean, you think it's a substitute for there's no more Vietnam War or something like that?
I mean, you think these are people who are inclined to— These are people who are looking— They're in San Francisco.
They're looking for evil, and they will find it.
Chaffey was quite honest in one of his presentations to it.
He doesn't talk often, but he's been doing it for the last few months.
Because for basically two years, he would never say a thing.
But he would write these scathing things and be quoted in The Independent or The Guardian, two or the—
more lefty-oriented publications.
He said that he was the commission, you know, 20 years ago was rude to him, and he was going to get redemption.
He was going to find vindication in his treatment by the commission.
We've all tried to understand him.
When I first came on the commission,
I listen to some of his stuff, puts out a newsletter that tries to look like it's an official publication of the department.
And I sat down with him.
We actually met in my office.
He wanted to come and see my office.
It was in another building.
And we spent probably an hour, two hours together.
I said, what does he want?
And he didn't want anything.
I said, what's your opinion on the library?
I'm talking to him by the way.
I'm just curious.
What does he want?
You tell me.
He wants us to follow the law.
It was really funny.
On the restraining order they wanted against us on the secretary of the commission, they asked for us to follow the law.
The judge looked at it and said, I'll grant that restraining order, follow the law.
And they thought they had a great victory, and then the city attorney says, what does that mean?
Can we hire this, move ahead with the hiring of the city librarian and the secretary?
He said, if you think that's following the law, you go ahead and do whatever you want.
And then they were devastated.
I mean, that's the silliness.
It is at this level of absolute petty bullshit.
And what's that all about?
Well, I guess they want you to step down from the library.
I think you've got to look at it.
When you meet Gina, you'll know right now why they can't attack her.
She has no responsibility for anything that's ever happened.
She's a retired...
librarian from Berkeley for 20 years.
And made it clear that she has no agenda beyond six months, so she's really here for that.
She's a former ALA president.
I've read her credentials.
She's fabulous.
She's a real easy-going, you know, she'll be all rumpled the way she dresses, and she's a tough lady, and she's funny, and she's frankly, she's shocking them.
I mean, she's saying things that Dowling said, and they were all over his case.
Card catalog came up at our last commission meeting.
And she looked at them and said, card catalog is just not an efficient, meaningful way to maintain any kind of your collection.
You can't find it.
You have to have card catalogs in all of the different branches.
It is the most costly way imaginable to maintain your collection and to provide access to it.
And it's just not financially feasible in this institution or in any libraries.
As a backup system, you know, we've got it sitting in the basement.
But, you know, she's sitting there making statements that Dowlin said, and they just rolled all over.
And with her, you know, the two or three people that are regulars in the audience, you know, were just sitting and looking at her with wide eyes, and the little union click, which was all over Dowlin on the, you know, on the card catalog issue, just sat there and looked.
They're afraid to say anything to her.
They don't know what to deal with her.
Who are they going to go after then?
Once, Dowlin was the focus.
When Dowlin left, they turned on me.
And then when we brought, then they sort of backed off after a while, because clearly the mayor was not interested.
They were getting nowhere with him.
Then we brought in Gina, who I think has been great.
Now, who picked Gina?
How did you get Gina?
I asked her.
Who was impressed?
I was really impressed.
We were...
I've been trying to work through the backlog.
This was your move, then, to go after Gina?
Yes.
And the commission, in fact, had one of the commissioners here, Charles Aguedis, and I sat for two hours and interviewed Gina before we offered the job, just walking through the issues.
And what's your hope that she will accomplish?
stability and normalcy?
I'm convinced that we will not find a first-rate librarian on a permanent basis to take the system until we show that we are not in the hellhole of libraries on earth.
We get our, you know, address the weeding issue and management, collection management issues.
We address storage issues.
We address
issues around getting materials back on the shelf.
Materials back on the shelf is the number one issue, as far as I'm concerned.
We've gone from the absolute worst, when we had labor fights over the pages, and where we were like six weeks behind in shelving some materials to 72 hours.
That's what we said right now.
It's about 72 hours for all materials.
and they hope to get it to 48.
I just want them to be consistent, set our goal, and then keep it.
I think we've got to do a variety of things to get the library in shape, build what clearly is some continuity here.
We have a reputation of a library that is run, I think, within librarians that I deal with around the country, a library where the union is out of control.
And I think we have to show that that is not the case.
Do you think you have that situation?
I think—I've been involved for nine years.
The union has not always—the union has always been contentious, but I've always found them reasonable to deal with up until the last two years, and the shift in the stewards.
And Kathy Bremer is the chief steward.
And I have found that they were— What's your agenda?
You said political power.
What kind of power?
I mean, I can't even—
chief steward of the librarian.
That's the issue.
You think this is a power grab on her part to actually— You wanted me to be candid.
I'd tell this to her face.
No, I want you to be candid.
I think that's what it's all about.
And you don't think it's about reading collections, folding humanities and literature into one, getting rid of— Who's going to run a library?
They're scared to death of private money.
Because they think private money you can't control.
They don't like volunteers.
Private money being what?
Like a telephone company, for instance?
I mean, that's an issue.
I mean, there is certainly the coincidental circumstance of you're working for this company, which is a major contributor to the library.
Why do you think they're a major contributor to the library?
You tell me.
I don't know.
Because I'm involved.
And I've pushed resources away the library.
So you came before the telephone company, so to speak.
We didn't do squat for the library before I got involved.
I mean, it's also alleged that, you know, the telephone company stands to make thousands of dollars, millions of dollars every time somebody makes a
That it's in your best interest.
I'm telling you what people say.
You've heard this stuff before.
I've heard this stuff before.
I actually went back.
I'm from Massachusetts, so I'm open to hear anything anyone has to say.
Let's just deal with some of these kinds of issues you've got here.
If you don't mind.
I would acknowledge you by asking.
I've had four Ethics Commission violations filed against me in the last year, one by Mr. Hale.
Mr. Hale being who?
I don't know.
Hale is one of the gap lines.
I haven't really talked to all of them, by the way.
One by one of the library staff activists.
It does get tedious after a point, I have to tell you.
Yeah.
So I've had four filed against things, one by one of the gadflies, one signed by one of the union activists, who you probably talked to.
Two others were anonymous.
The Ethics Commission looked at all four of them, and they were all charging that I was doing these illegal things and doing things that I shouldn't be doing within the library.
everything you've heard was in this file.
They found no basis to any of it.
The Ethics Commission of San Francisco.
It's a governmental... It's a governmental body appointed by the mayor that is to look at conflicts of interest between appointed elected officials.
Alleged conflicts of interest.
Alleged conflicts of interest in the city and county of San Francisco.
So I've had four of them filed against me since I've been back on the commission.
Four of them, four times, the commission has found there is no evidence.
When the mayor hired an auditor,
to come in and look at the library.
I said, among the things I'd like you to look at are charges of conflict of interest against me.
She said, I'll add it to the list.
In the audit findings, she came out and said, there have been charges that commission president Steve Coulter has been in a conflict of interest in his position as president of the commission and as also an executive with Pacific Belt.
I find absolutely no basis for any of these charges.
telecommunications department, an agency quite independent, has nothing to do with the library, makes all decisions on telecommunications in this city.
So that's five times.
Five times government agencies have looked at this, and it's still here.
So tell me why I'm still dealing with that if there's not a political agenda that goes beyond this.
Tell me why, if there's not a political agenda, are they hounding Ken Dallin, you know, in his job at San Jose State?
Are they hounding David Price, who was his guy, on the budget when he's back in West Virginia?
Price is a new name for me.
David Price.
He was one of Ken's guys that he hired when I was off the commission.
Do you think Ken Dallin is a man of vision?
I think Ken was really problematic.
I like Ken personally.
I did not hire him.
I thought that he had a broad vision.
I thought it was an impractical one, often, frankly, as we looked at the technology that he wanted to do.
Of the Library of the Future.
I thought the videotape, the one you saw, I gave him the money.
He said he wanted to do a videotape on the Library of the Future.
I said, okay.
I said, here's the money.
Go do it.
You have the robotic voice.
And I saw the goddamn thing, and I looked at it, and I thought, this is terrible.
I asked Ken, what in the hell were you thinking?
I thought it was done here.
Our corporate TV did it.
I asked the woman who had it, I said, do a good job, present his vision.
Because at that point, I'd just come on the commission.
He wanted to put it together, and I thought, well, $25,000, $30,000.
He wanted to do a vision, a videotape that he could show...
basically other techie types, I had thought that it was something we could use in our fundraising.
I saw the tape, and the first thing I said was, you know, Ken, we can't use this.
This is the most cold, insensitive, undesirable picture of the future that I've ever seen.
Well, the woman is a hologram.
I mean, a woman talking who's not real.
So I mean, women would get totally pissed off about that.
I couldn't believe it.
And then the voice, the narrator, is a robotic voice.
Yeah, no, it was a terrible piece.
I said, kid, you can't, your videotape on libraries ought to be just full of kids and exciting programs and history.
I said, you've got kids in there as a little sidelight, about five seconds.
So we never used it.
And the books are in the glass, by the way.
Yeah.
And the type catalog is gathering dust.
It's a relic of fossil.
I said, Jesus Christ, if you're looking to influence people.
Well, but you've got to look at what Ken was.
He saw himself—because I went to a number of ALA and CLA conferences where Ken spoke, because I wanted to see the guy.
And I took part in some conferences myself, just talking about what our emerging vision was for the San Francisco Library and fundraising kind of stuff.
Ken was—saw himself as a prophet way out there, and the difference between
being a prophet who does not have to produce and being a prophet who does, I think is a lot.
And so when he went from the theoretical to the actually having to do it, I think he ran into a lot of problems.
But as a writer, and as someone who wanted to establish a reputation, he was trying to be further out than anybody else on a lot of the stuff.
And that can get you into trouble sometimes.
If you get into a position where you've actually got to produce and
He was not good political.
I think, I thought a lot of his ideas were very intriguing.
I thought he was a nice guy to deal with personally.
The last year and a half that we, the last year and a half, you know, I've been off commission for two years, although I continued to raise money for the library, went on the Library Foundation.
When I came back, the focus was clearly just, I mean, I came back on in mid-January, and we opened in April.
And so we were just trying to put the opening together.
But after that, there was a disconnect from reality.
We had some strong discussions about the directions we were going.
The book shelving problem, for example, the commission had an entirely different view than Ken did on how we had to handle it.
He wanted to go to war with the Union over the pages.
Because there had been three years of discussions about whether we were going to create a new class of employee called shelvers that would be paid less.
Our pages are the highest paid in the United States.
They make between, I don't know, $12 and $15 now, an hour.
And Ken wanted to set up a new category at $7 an hour, and they were called shelvers.
And we needed a lot of shelvers for the NMA Library.
We knew that.
He was going to—he was allowing the books to back up, arguing that'll make the union look bad.
And we said, Ken, anyone's going to look bad is you in the library.
We got in a big fight over the thing.
But at the same time, in June of last year, the charter to the city changed, and the role of commissions changed.
And we went from a commission that oversaw basically everything to a commission that was only policy.
And that—
Ken felt that meant that the commission didn't run the library.
He did.
He was the CEO.
He was the mayor's guy.
We told him, yeah, that's true in some sense, but you're not the mayor's guy.
You're Steinstein's guy, and she hasn't been the mayor for a long time, and you're not appointee of this mayor.
Anyway, he pushed back on us and basically alienated his own commission on him, and then he ran into financial trouble.
So he had to go.
Basically, he had not thought through some of the budget items well at all.
The page issue turned out to be a disaster.
People found it hard to find a lot of materials.
Now, let me come out on his defense.
One labor person that you have talked to came and approached the senior managers and said, you know, books will get back on the shelf a whole lot quicker if you get rid of those volunteers.
You have to assume that there was some sabotage on people wanting him to look as bad as possible to get rid of the guy.
Can— Of course, you have nothing to back that up.
That's just the sense that you have, based on maybe— Comments like that.
—the veiled—the not-so-veiled suggestion that maybe, you know, if you get rid of the volunteers,
As Ken was arguing... Things will improve.
Let me give you some examples.
Ken, when we was talking about the pages at their worst, Kathy Bremer put out a flyer.
She's the chief steward.
I know, by the way.
Yeah, calling for the pages.
It was a call to arms.
Don't let them, you know, kick out our weakest members.
We had 23 pages show up.
I'd listened to all of them in three minutes apiece.
Angry...
at anyone who would threaten them, and a lot of them, in their public testimony.
Because the union over time has taken the pages and allowed a page to go from somebody who just shelves books to someone who can check them out, who can have access to the database, what have you, which is a little bit more like a librarian than a page.
And we have page after page stand up there and talk about, if they have to, they will put books on the shelf.
But primarily they're writers and authors and
They are playwrights.
They are working on their second degrees.
And the commission came away with a point of view that basically this is an angry group of employees, one that thinks they're too good to show books, and probably one.
We talked to some of my other commissioners.
Don't just look at me.
I mean, I'm one of seven.
But I think pages do important work.
You've got to have somebody doing it.
I think we've created a professional class of pages that no other library has done.
New York pays six an hour, and we're paying 15 for our top pages.
And it's, you know, we hired 40 more pages.
The union's position is pages should be full-time, full benefits, protected position.
I think that's the craziest thing I've ever heard in my life.
But if the city is willing to come up with the money for a skewed labor force, then great.
I don't care.
I mean, that's a decision the mayor and the board of supervisors are going to make.
They're imposing these conditions on us.
I just have to sit and look at the budget and wonder, are we so politicized?
Is the union trying to roil up problems so much that it makes so many people angry that you had problems?
I mean, I have had stories of people come and say pages are putting the books in the wrong place intentionally.
They wanted to maximize the pain on Dallin to get rid of him.
So that's in his defense.
I've already told you on the other side, I thought he was his own worst enemy on a lot of stuff and wouldn't listen to the commission.
And we had some real come-to-Jesus private discussions with him.
We're criticized because we didn't do it publicly up until almost the very end.
We had ordered him, the last commission meeting before he left, I had sat in a meeting, and I had absolutely ordered him to meet with the union on these issues.
The rest of the commission concurred that he must do that.
And he gave his presentation on the budget, which was probably the best presentation he's ever done on the budget, the most cohesive I'd ever seen.
And we asked about his union conferring, and he said he hadn't met.
All seven of us at that point were so angry.
We knew it was useless.
We knew that sitting down with Kathy Bremer would accomplish nothing, but he had an obligation to sit down and do it.
And he wouldn't do it.
He refused to deal with them most of his last year.
And it was stupid.
From our position, it was absolutely a kiss of death, because I don't think the rank and file is hostile.
I think most people on the staff are great people.
I think you've got
some troublemakers.
I think this is San Francisco, you know, where everybody, you know, loves a good fight.
I think most of the staff, everything I've heard, is they just want to get on with the job, and they're tired of, you know, this kind of stuff in some of these meetings.
Some of the people are absolutely shocked to find out some of the things, you know, that happen in some of our meetings.
I mean, when you're sitting down there with Kathy Bremer and some of her folks, ask them why they were so opposed to private money.
Why are they so opposed to my
You know, my affinity group center is coming in.
Well, yeah, and, you know, I said to some of these people, I said, you know, I did Paul LeClaire, who's the president of the New York Public Library, who was a friend of mine.
Heard great things about him.
And, you know, he's not a librarian, he's a librarian.
Well, most of the great librarians today aren't librarians.
I mean, Barton is a historian.
Barton is one of the people who got us energized.
Yeah, it's fabulous.
And so Paul said to me, you know how much money I have to raise every week?
He said, pick a number to keep this thing going.
I said, $200,000.
He said, $600,000 a week is what I raise.
You know, that's $30 million a year.
And the New York Public Library, as I said to some of these people, had to realize that's a totally
that's public only in name it's a private totally private institution and arguably the greatest public library in the world it's fabulous it is fabulous so I mean that's not a defense that you know I told you I have an open mind to these things and I'm a book person and I'm a library person but you know is it necessary to keep every copy of the phone book I hope not
You know what I'm saying?
But I think one copy of the phone book is good because you do get demographic information out of the phone book.
You know, we're struggling.
I'm concerned now, but when we had our first chat on the phone, you didn't say we had our problems.
Oh, we do.
Major problems, and you're hoping that they're behind you.
I am concerned about the future.
I mean, is there room for new books down there?
So clearly...
There's going to have to be kind of an aggressive program of weeding and getting— Well, I want to— And we haven't really discussed the sending of the books off to the landfill, which really probably, you know, is easily their most dramatic, you know, of the Nicholson-Bakers story which made this national.
Yeah, that happened about the time I was coming on The Commissioner, maybe it wasn't even on yet, it happened in December.
I came on in mid-January.
I was right in there when that story hit.
Which story?
The dumping of the books.
And it made no sense to me, because they're not supposed to do that.
I mean, that's not what our policy is, that you take books to the dump.
Now, that was the policy under the city when I first came in, when Dowland first came in.
And Dowland, to his credit, went to the board of supervisors and said, I ought to be able to sell books that we don't need anymore, that we need it, or give them away.
They changed the statutes within the city.
At that point, that's all you could do.
You had to declare surplus and of no use, and you tossed it.
So he changed the law in San Francisco.
That stuff, we've got a process that says, you know, the friends can sell it.
You give it to community groups.
We've gone one step further, and, you know, we can give them away to the public now when we have no use for them anywhere else.
But that was a weird one.
And I handled that one wrong coming on the commission.
I made a big mistake on that.
I thought our focus was opening the new main library.
I thought it was an aberration.
I don't know how many were taken to the dump, but it was clearly not policy to do that.
But it happened.
I should have called a public meeting on it and chastised the hell out of some staff and come to the bottom of what happened.
I thought you didn't know about it.
I do about it after the fact.
I mean, it shows up in the paper, and I'm reading the thing and saying, what in the hell is this?
No, but you didn't know about it while it was going on.
No, I didn't know a thing about it.
I talked to the senior library staff.
They tell me they didn't know anything about it either.
So what was Dowling's undoubtedly must have known?
He claims he didn't.
Kathy Page claims she didn't know.
So who was doing it?
Well, I mean, you get into one of these kinds of things.
The argument was that staff was acting in an unauthorized way that got in a panic.
over how to move this stuff.
He closed the old main library in December, and they had to move, pick a number, umpteen million items.
Dowling picked 13 million items, and I've heard a number of items.
If you count everything, there's a lot of stuff.
And I do think a panic set in, and suddenly the story shows up.
First, any of us and the new commissioners saw it was in the paper that there was this dumping.
I called Dowling and said, what is going on?
And he comes back and says, I'm investigating.
You know, and so— I mean, truly, I'm not a—listen, this is a chapter in a book.
This is not going to be the history of the San Francisco— No, I mean, I know that.
And, you know, there's only—I don't want all of these, but somebody must have audited the trucks.
It must be—it must be a—somebody must know
And I think I made a mistake by not going after them.
It is a knowable thing, I think, you know.
It is a knowable thing.
I think we could have done something.
As president of the commission, I should have stepped in and said, I want to hold public hearings on this or something like that.
What I did not want to do, though, because I was still trying to raise money for the library so that we could have what we needed for the opening in three months,
Would you describe that as a public relations disaster?
When it first hit, it was very upsetting.
I thought it would pass, and it did for a period of time.
And then the Nicholson-Baker stuff came out, who was invited in by Melissa Riley, one of the union stewards of them, Melissa.
Melissa is one of those that vigorously opposes private money in the institution.
And she invited Nicholson-Baker
to talk about stuff, and that's when you got into the fight over not only the dumping of books, but the weeding of books.
And I thought it ended up basically hurting the system, but also an attack on the librarian professionals and their responsibility for managing collections and making decisions.
I mean, as a commissioner, I don't want to make a decision as to what books you keep or not keep.
I don't have any background on that.
I want professionals to make those decisions following reasonable guidelines.
And our guidelines do not allow us to dump books.
Books should not be going to the dump unless they are in a condition of total wreck, falling apart, basically so beat up that no one would want to use them.
And there is no home.
Nobody wants them.
You can't give them away.
then I think you have to address what you're going to do on that.
But that's not our policy to throw books away.
I think that bothers me.
It bothers, obviously, the citizens of the city.
And I should have been more aggressive on it.
My focus was, frankly, opening the library and trying to raise the last millions that we needed and the money that we needed to do a grand opening and kick the whole thing off.
I assumed it would go by.
When the Nicholson-Baker thing hit, it was several months down the road.
you know, just different.
He didn't go back.
Well, what's your reaction to that?
Was that a counterproductive thing?
I thought Nicholson Baker, I mean, we were very nice to him when he first came in.
I wish we'd have just dumped the whole card catalog.
I think we tried to be thoughtful and listen to him and tried to— You're talking about the first story now.
Well, I thought, when he got into the— His article was on the card catalog, and
I thought about the New Yorker article.
There were two New Yorker articles.
There was one on the card catalog, and then there was one about a year ago on the Dumping of Brooks story.
I thought he was a guy that was an activist in his own right, that was brought in by the Guild, which was fine.
tried to whip up a story and then sold it to The New Yorker.
So I thought he had a vested interest in what he was trying to do.
That's my honest take on the guy.
I thought he was over the top in a lot of the charges that he made.
And I finally bought the argument that the card catalog, which we had not updated, had been nothing on since 1991, was an historical artifact worthy of saving for at least a period of time.
And so we're stuck at what's sitting in Brooks Hall right now.
And that's where it'll sit for a while.
There's very little interest in people using it.
Our view was, in listening to staff, and I think a right one, that if people are sent to the card catalog in most cases, it will only create confusion.
And they will then come back and have to find a librarian who will help walk them through why they can't find stuff.
After the earthquake in 1989, they did the first inventory of the collection in memory of anyone who worked for the institution.
And we did not update the card catalog.
I think, if it's okay, I'll get back to you.
I mean, this is a long tape.
I mean, I'm just trying to answer your question.
Obviously, I have feelings on the library.
myself, you know, you've been very generous with your time so far.
I'd be happy to, you want to talk a little more?
Oh, I don't care.
Whatever you want to do, I'm just trying to be, to be helpful.
Okay, no, you are.
I mean, I think, I don't want to see the library continue to get beat up, because I think people, we've probably got too much good publicity that I think the pendulum has gone the other way.
And I'd like to see the pendulum start coming back towards something more
You think now it's bad?
I think it got really bad for a period of time.
I think the pendulum is starting to move into a more reasonable area of looking at us just passionately.
I think bringing Gina in was a stroke of death.
I mean Kathy Page and I talked about it.
Because she's beyond reproach.
Reproach, absolutely.
totally respected by the whole she's wonderful she gave a little speech at her first not a speech she had a prepared statement that she gave at her first commission meeting a month or so ago and it talked about love of books and all that kind of stuff I thought it was great so I had a verbatim made out of it we attach it to the minute I want people to see that because I think she's smart and I think she's having a good time I keep telling her have a good time you're not going to live with this the rest of your life you're only 60 years old
She's got a great background.
This library is one she worked in when she was going to library school.
Here.
Well, I guess she's going to Berkeley.
Under here being the Bay Area.
Yeah.
And what's funny is when you talk to her, she says, we had a lot of the same staff problems here then that you've gotten out.
The name that some people use for some of the librarians you're talking to, what was it, one woman told me the other day, after the meeting when Annette McNair attacked me,
She said, we call them the coven.
Who's the coven?
The coven is Kenneth McNair, Kathy Bremer, Melissa Riley, Andre Grimes, who am I missing?
I'm missing one or two.
All middle-aged white women who've been in the institution for long and long.
That's kind of a tough statement to make.
I mean, I've heard it.
You know, obviously, I've heard that.
I think we have— That's a very combative kind of a statement.
It is.
It is a combative statement.
Coming out of our hearings— I'm a middle-aged white guy, you know.
But you're not trying to keep people of color out.
You think they're trying to keep people of color out?
I had—came out of one of our public hearings last year.
Out of what now?
Out of the library, out of the process that advises the library and gives input on how we're going to
look at our collections, how we're going to manage our collections, how we're going to look at our programs.
We had a set of extraordinary hearings last year over what was called the MOU, the Memorandum of Understanding, that we had passed between the library and basically the city on how we were going to bring in private money to come into the building of the new Maine.
So there was a process in place, the control that was involved in.
We sought to extend that so that they could continue to raise money for us, only to include all of the branches.
And there was one of the ugliest campaigns I've ever seen in my twenty-five years or so in public life against the private money that came in.
It was led by the people you're talking to from the library and staff.
I kind of said to everybody, by the way.
No, but the basic ones, I mean the ones that I just mentioned, are the core of it.
talk to them.
I'm out front with everything I do.
In some of those meetings, like I had one of them in one meeting said, we've always bought books for black people.
We don't need black people coming in here and telling us what to do.
Now you tell me what that kind of a statement is.
I can tell you what those kinds of statements that were made at our public hearings, how people of color reacted to them.
I called it racism.
One Asian woman, Waku, who was one of our donors,
She walked out of one of our meetings and said, you know, I'm really glad that I came to this meeting.
She said, I've now seen the face of institutional racism in this library among some of your union officials, and I am disgusted.
Well, can this be documented by, are there things that they're not buying that they should be buying?
I mean, are they not buying Toni Morrison?
Are they not buying anything?
See, I don't think this is, I do not think that this is a rank-and-file issue.
I think most people in the library are wonderful.
I think some of the staff was really, really talented.
I think you're dealing with a handful of people who have control of the guild in the last two years.
What am I supposed to tell people?
One of our African-American donors, we just live it after one of these meetings.
And we had to try to calm him down.
The comments that were being made in the audience
by the activists that showed up.
Some of these included the non-Library Guild people.
But the impression is clearly that we're quite happy with the way things are.
We, the library staff, will make the decisions on what people need.
We do not need anyone else coming in and interfering with the way we will run this institution.
It's an ivory tower kind of an approach.
It's an inward-looking approach.
an approach that does not deal with the kind of diversity we're trying to bring in the institution.
This commission, which is composed of seven donors, and is a majority of people of color, and I'll throw myself in as a gay man, we are really upset with the kind of stuff we heard last year and that we sometimes still hear coming up.
And I got hard feelings on some of it, yeah.
I think some of these people are absolutely destructive on the institution.
And they're not there representing the need of the institution.
They're representing their own personal power play.
And I am damned at it.
I am disgusted with them.
And if I use hard language, so what?
And they're coming at me on this kind of stuff.
Yeah.
Does this piss you off?
No, I look at it as being the kind of petty level that we are at.
I mean, I try not to engage them in these meetings.
But we hear from, you know, our commission meetings are a joke.
We hear from about ten people.
You know, you hear the same people over and over again.
It makes it very difficult to do what you need to do.
But we're trying to, you know, one piece by piece.
Today I have a new secretary on the commission to start.
I have to get somebody who is really political, really tough, that can deal with these folks, the gadflies that are out there, and the lawsuits and requests for information.
I've now got a first-rate interim librarian there.
I hope she stays for a long time.
I'm frankly not in a big rush to find a replacement for her.
And who's doing a search for the criminal, by the way?
We're not in the midst of a search at the moment.
Really?
So she's a— We like her.
We couldn't launch a search until the budget came out in July, and the mayor doesn't think we need a search.
We, because of domestic partners' issues and other complexities, dealing with the local contracting has made it more difficult.
But we're not in a big rush.
We think we've found a great person to sit there because, again, we believe that we've got to solve some of the problems before we're going to be able to bring in a really top-notch permanent person.
Nobody's going to want to do it until we have tamed some of the tigers that people see us here.
But, I mean, if you look in this book, I mean, the library has always been one that's done it on its own.
The city has never stood there for the library system.
It's been, well, from Carnegie money, building the old main library, to different people who brought in different collections and friends organizing in the 60s.
You know, Marjorie Stern, who I think is one of the great heroines of the library system.
involved for 40 years on the fight for the new Maine Library.
They're wonderful people.
But it's been a grassroots kind of thing, making it happen.
You know, coming back to the union again, the union... You know, I'm going to have to ask them point blank.
Nobody has told me that they're opposed to private money.
I've created allegations about the telephone company and all this, and I keep saying, well, you know, show me something.
You know, it's easy to say...
Melissa Riley, two months ago, at the first meeting that Gina was at, said she'd like to raise a million dollars to upgrade the online system.
Who said that?
Gina.
Right.
Who said that?
And I said, I think you'd have to do some homework before you get in.
Because she said, let's go to downtown business and have them.
Gina says.
Gina said this, Gina Minutri, at this commission meeting.
I think we could raise money, but I think it would take time.
And frankly, the library staff would have to be seen as supportive.
The union, the guild, has got to be seen as supportive of private money coming in the institution.
Otherwise, I think we've so turned off downtown business that they're not going to get involved.
And Melissa Riley, she came up as a steward, the one you've talked to, and this is last month, and said,
I personally oppose private money in the library system.
I think we should raise taxes.
In fact, I think we should repeal Proposition 13 so that people can pay more property taxes, and that will solve the problem.
When we've run into budget problems before, Beth McNair one time stood up and said, the problem is downtown business is not paying enough taxes.
We need to raise taxes, you know, potentially for everybody, and keep all this private money out.
You know, the fight over the MOU.
Time after time, the union has taken a very clear position.
No private money in this institution.
Tova Singer, who's one of the activists, his library staff did an op-ed piece to examine Iran, referred to Jim Hormel as the heir to a union-busting meatpacking firm.
You know, the snide comments on Charlotte Meyer's swig, who's now Charlotte Meyer, Charlotte has just married George Shultz, former Secretary of State.
She's sort of, she's our protocol chief.
She's sort of Mrs. Charity in San Francisco.
And her and her late husband, Mel, co-chair our fundraising campaign.
And, you know, we raised $35 million.
You take out New York public.
in a world quite by itself and as a private institution, in terms of publicly run public libraries.
That's the most successful private fundraising campaign in library history.
We are the envy of libraries all over the country.
Yet the leaders of the Guild in the last two years, and I keep pointing out it's only been in the last two years, have been condescending, endless nasty comments.
I'm attacked for my role in fundraising.
you know, I've got some of our biggest minority donors, you may want to ask them, we have a letter that about ten minority donors sent to the staff, basically raising some of these racism questions.
The guild response was, this is an attempt to intimidate us poor people by the rich people who are out there, and Nicholson Baker, while he was here, and they did it, and it was
It never became a news article, but what you have is a real chilling effect on minority donors towards this institution.
It is real.
And I put the blame entirely in front of the current ill leadership.
I told this to Josie Mooney, who heads
I don't know what their members are.
But it is a problem.
I have tried, as someone who still wants to fundraise for the institution and still has belief in it, I've tried to keep a lot of these things out of the public eye.
We have more of our fights in private, or they do some piece of bullshit like that.
I'm hoping it doesn't come to a total blowout.
But you could have a situation where basically the minority communities of this community say enough.
Now, you have some of the staff is great, like the Chinatown staff just works their behinds off and is really sensitive to that community.
And a lot of the minority staff are great, and a lot of the regular staff is great.
When I say eight angry white women, I do that very intentionally.
They are indeed that.
Much like I'm the queer who sits over the Library Commission, when they attacked me for—privately, when it came back to me— This is down and dirty, you know.
When they attacked me for appointing Kathy—having Dowling appoint Kathy Page as the interim librarian, and she was a lesbian, and so this was part of the homosexual agenda.
to the gay mafia kind of thing, for me to get a homosexual in as the interim librarian.
I mean, I was disgusted when that one came across.
But yeah, so it gets down and dirty.
This is contact sports in politics in San Francisco.
I have tried to keep it from being personal in a public venue.
Oh, Christ, it's pretty fucking personal to me.
But it is, maybe that's sort of where it is.
And it did not used to be that way.
Nine years ago, it was not this way.
Very interesting.
So, I mean, I am really proud as to where we have come.
You know, we have raised money.
We have a $140 million building that you've been into.
It came in on budget and on time.
I mean, think about that.
This is San Francisco.
And we had to overcome unbelievable obstacles.
Like I mentioned, the Pioneer Monument.
That was a multi-month fight to move a derelict, basically abandoned, old piece of Victorian architecture so we could make room for an expanded children's center.
And it was downright ugly on trying to move the damn thing.
We had raised $750,000 privately to move it and put it in its current location.
It's the monument between the old main and the new main.
I think it looks great.
I mean, it was sat directly in front of the old city hall.
The old city hall fell down, and they moved it, you know, years later over to the current site.
So it would have been in the back side of the city center.
We moved it to a prime position directly in front of city hall,
It's in an honorific position, and we tried once on the ballot, we'll probably try again, to turn that into a little park-like setting, that street.
But that was a horrible fight.
I mean, you would not believe the historians calling us names and that kind of stuff.
Really down and dirty, very personal.
So I saw one other thing at you that people ask me.
They ask Steve Folder, what do you mean?
Do you have a library card?
I have a library card.
No, I mean, it's perfectly reasonable.
I read three newspapers a day.
I have two news magazines a week that I also subscribe to.
I read a great deal of science fiction.
I probably have half a dozen books at any time that I am reading.
I like books.
I do not consider myself an intellectual.
I do not consider myself, you know, a great collector of books, although I have
My office at home is two floor-to-ceiling walls just full of books.
You know, I like to read.
I consider myself very pro-book.
They think I'm anti-book and I'm only technology.
I think it looks at me really one-dimensional.
I was amused when it was posed to me, but I think it's a fair question to ask.
Given the perception of the San Francisco Libraries with that tape
of being the library of the future.
And then you have this other problem with books going off to the dump.
Maybe they don't care about books.
I don't think that's the case at all.
But these are questions that somebody from the outside might want to ask.
So I think that for that reason the question is worth asking.
I mean, I didn't even want to come back on the Library Commission.
Yeah, tell me, you mentioned earlier that you were fired from the Commission.
Is that what you said?
Oh, we had a big fight with Jordan.
Jordan actually— Jordan being old.
Jordan was the mayor that defeated— What's his first name?
Frank.
Frank Jordan.
A really nice guy, totally over his head as being mayor.
He was a former police chief, Feinstein's police chief.
Anyway, defeated Agnos in a squeaker, a super-vendetta film election between competing
campaign managers who hated each other.
It was horrible.
He reappointed me to the commission, asked me to stay, but he put in someone else's president, which was just fine, Jim Herlihy, whom I did not get along with.
And the library budget was continuing to decline.
They hadn't opened the new main.
We were still trying to build up, and the challenge was to
How do you build a fairly bold vision of where you want to take the institution, build a new main library, raise $35 million privately?
At the same time, the reality is each year, in a practical sense, you're getting less money.
Pay wages, wage raises, lift it up, but basically you got less money each year.
And we had some branches open 20 hours a week.
We were at about a million dollars a year in materials.
that we were buying each year, it was ridiculous.
And the mayor came up with a new proposal, which was publicly we were only supposed to discuss another $250,000 cut.
Privately we were to take another million dollar cut.
And the argument went around was basically eliminate the book collection, you know, any new materials.
That'll save you a million dollars.
We need to wind down, even lower some of the branches.
The mayor took the position that we will not close a branch.
If it's only open five hours a week, it's still open.
If the president of the commission's position was only open an hour a week, it's still open, technically open.
So we may only be in a technical sense in terms of open, but all 27 branches will be open.
And the commission basically revealed.
We said, that's insane.
The middle class is going to walk away
from the public library.
For many kids in all the years that we've been involved, they have never seen a quality library in San Francisco.
The money is only going in one direction.
It's less and less.
The number of materials we're buying is getting lower and lower.
Just the quality of service is getting worse and worse.
And if you continue these kind of cuts and if you go to five hours a week on some of your branches, you know, why is a middle class going to stick?
You know, there's articles about people giving up on the public school system.
Are they going to do that to the public libraries?
We actually had what I thought was a very difficult commission to be on.
It had the wife of the CEO of Bank of America was one of the people on it.
It had Rosalind Swig of the Fairmont chain, who was Charlotte Swig's sister-in-law.
And it had a number of others who was conservative.
I was too liberal as a liberal Democrat.
But the mayor liked it.
But anyway, six to one, we voted that if the mayor was going to cut a million dollars, then we needed to close the branches.
And we needed to then, the position was basically, let's do really first-rate, top-quality library service that would make any system proud in a dozen branches and maybe close the list.
Or if we can do it in 18 branches, great.
Let's find an alternative use for the, you know, during emergency.
Turn them into senior citizen centers or something.
Some of the branches were a little more than that anyway, which is fine.
But anyway, so there was a big fight over it.
It was seen as defying the mayor, so we fired six of us.
And then what started was a protracted argument within the public, of which I was part of, is when is a library a library?
When is open open?
You know, five hours a week, I mean, that's a shell game.
Well, that's ridiculous.
It's ridiculous.
The mayor's position was, you know, as long as it's open any length of time, it is open, and I will not be a mayor to close branches.
But he was a mayor who was willing to eliminate the book budget.
He actually made the statement at one point, they got a lot of books.
Now, which mayor?
This is Mayor Jordan.
What do you need more books for?
He got a lot of books.
He said that.
He took a hell of a lot of heat.
And the library community did not back him in the election which he faced Willie Brown.
So then Willie brought you back?
Mm-hmm.
The library community, the friends of the library and the